---
layout: default
title: For Developers
nav_order: 8
has_children: false
---

# Github Repositories Related to ComStock
{: .fw-500 }

These repositories are publicly available for use, but we are not able to provide technical support or documentation for running ComStock at this time. We strongly suggest and support using the public datasets. The dataset outputs from the initial ComStock (V1.0) release can be found by visiting [Published Datasets]({{  site.baseurl  }}{% link docs/data.md %}) page.

## ComStock Repository
This repository contains the source code used to build and execute ComStock models, including upgrade scenarios. In addition, the sampling of building characteristics used for the initial ComStock (V1.0) release is provided. The ComStock model is under active calibration and development, which is publicly visible on this repository.

[ComStock Repository](https://github.com/NREL/ComStock){: .btn .btn-uo .white-text}

## OpenStudio-Standards Repository
ComStock relies heavily on `openstudio-standards`, a Ruby Gem library that extends the OpenStudio SDK. It has four main use-cases:

1.	Provide higher level methods to help BEM users and developers to create OpenStudio models from existing geometry, or programmatically generated geometry
2.	Create typical building models in OpenStudio format
3.	Create a code baseline model from a proposed model
4.	Check a model against a code/standard

[OpenStudio-Standards Repository](https://github.com/NREL/openstudio-standards){: .btn .btn-uo .white-text}


## Buildstock Batch Repository
Execution of the ComStock workflow is managed through the `buildstockbatch` repository, a shared asset of ResStock and ComStock, specifically developed to scale to execution of tens of millions of simulations through multiple infrastructure providers.

[Buildstock Batch Repository](https://github.com/nrel/buildstockbatch){: .btn .btn-uo .white-text}

## BuildStockQuery Repository
`buildstock-query` is a Python library for querying datasets generated by ResStock™ and ComStock™. Introductory tutorial videos can be found on the [NLR Learning BuildStock Analysis YouTube channel](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jmmAHsOZAp8&list=PLmIn8Hncs7bEYCZiHaoPSovoBrRGR-tRS&index=6).

[BuildStockQuery Repository](https://github.com/NREL/buildstock-query){: .btn .btn-uo .white-text}

## Example Jupyter Notebooks
Helpful notebooks are posted to this page.  We have also heard many folks have success with ChatGPT writing custom scripts.

[Example Jupyter Notebooks]({{  site.baseurl  }}{% link docs/resources/how_to_guides/example_scripts.md %}){: .btn .btn-uo .white-text}
