---
layout: default
title: Package 5
parent: Upgrade Measures
nav_order: 15
---

# HP-RTU + ASHP Boiler + Demand Control Ventilation + Heat/Energy Recovery + Economizers
{: .fw-500 }

Author: Marlena Praprost

# Executive Summary

Building on the successfully completed effort to calibrate and validate
the U.S. Department of Energy's ResStock™ and ComStock™ models over the
past several years, the objective of this work is to produce national
data sets that empower analysts working for federal, state, utility,
city, and manufacturer stakeholders to answer a broad range of analysis
questions.

The goal of this work is to develop energy efficiency, electrification,
and demand flexibility end-use load shapes (electricity, gas, propane,
or fuel oil) that cover a majority of the high-impact, market-ready (or
nearly market-ready) upgrade measures, or upgrades. "Measures" refers to
energy efficiency variables that can be applied to buildings during
modeling.

An *end-use savings shape* is the difference in energy consumption
between a baseline building and a building with an energy efficiency,
electrification, or demand flexibility upgrade applied. It results in a
time-series profile that is broken down by end use and fuel (electricity
or on-site gas, propane, or fuel oil use) at each time step.

ComStock is a highly granular, bottom-up model that uses multiple data
sources, statistical sampling methods, and advanced building energy
simulations to estimate the annual sub-hourly energy consumption of the
commercial building stock across the United States. The baseline model intends to represent the U.S. commercial building stock as it existed in 2018. The methodology and results of the baseline model are discussed in the final technical report of the [End-Use Load Profiles](https://www.nrel.gov/buildings/end-use-load-profiles.html) project.

An upgrade package applies one or more End-Use Savings Shapes upgrades
to a single building model simulation. Since ComStock is a bottom-up
physics-based model, an upgrade package will go beyond aggregating or
summing the individual upgrade results and produce novel results by
simulating interactions between the upgrades. For example, pairing an
envelope upgrade with an electrification upgrade would likely result in
higher savings results than the sum of these upgrades individually, and
the size of the heating, ventilating, and air conditioning (HVAC)
equipment may be reduced if the envelope upgrade reduces the loads
significantly.

This documentation focuses on an upgrade package of five End-Use Savings
Shapes upgrades--- [Heat Pump Rooftop Unit
(HP-RTU)](https://nrel.github.io/ComStock.github.io/docs/upgrade_measures/hvac_hp_rtu.html),
[Air-Source Heat Pump
(ASHP)-Boiler](https://nrel.github.io/ComStock.github.io/docs/upgrade_measures/hvac_ashp_boiler.html),
Economizers, [Exhaust Air Heat Recovery (HR)/Energy
Recovery](https://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy24osti/87542.pdf), and [Demand
Control Ventilation](https://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy24osti/86897.pdf)
(DCV). This combination of upgrades will collectively be referred to as
the "HP-RTU + ASHP Boiler + DCV + HR + Economizers" package. HP-RTUs are
applied to buildings with gas or electric RTUs, while the ASHP-Boiler
measure is applied to buildings with existing boilers systems. Energy
Recovery, Economizers, and DCV each have their own applicability
criteria, which will be discussed in subsequent sections. The intent of
this HP-RTU + ASHP Boiler + DCV + HR + Economizers package is to upgrade
the existing building stock with top-of-the-line HVAC equipment and
energy savings features wherever possible. This includes replacing two
of the most common types of HVAC systems (RTUs and boilers) with heat
pumps, and retrofitting HVAC systems with energy savings features like
Energy Recovery, DCV, and Economizers. More details on the individual
upgrades can be found on the [ComStock Measures
Documentation](https://nrel.github.io/ComStock.github.io/docs/upgrade_measures/upgrade_measures.html)
page.

The HP-RTU and ASHP-Boiler measures were applicable to 33%, and 29% of
the stock floor area, respectively. It is important to note that the
HVAC systems that receive the HP-RTU or ASHP-Boiler upgrade make up 62%
of the ComStock floor area, but 91% of the stock natural gas heating.
The Economizer, DCV, and Exhaust Air Heat/Energy Recovery measures were
applicable to 57%, 71%, and 78% of the stock floor area, respectively.
There will be significant overlap in the applicability when the
individual measures are combined into a package. For example, for a
building with an RTU, the HP-RTU measure will be applied first,
replacing the existing RTU with a HP-RTU. Then, the DCV, Economizer, and
Heat Recovery measures will be applied after if the new HP-RTU does not
already have each of these features.

The HP-RTU + ASHP Boiler + DCV + HR + Economizers package demonstrates
19.8% total site energy savings (857 trillion British thermal units
\[TBtu\]) for the U.S. commercial building stock modeled in ComStock
(Figure 9). The savings are a result of electrification of gas-furnace
and boiler systems, which are then combined with efficiency upgrades
like DCV, Heat/Energy Recovery, and Economizers:

-   **86.7%** stock **heating gas** savings (740.8 TBtu)

-   **-84.9%** stock **heating electricity** savings (-148.7 TBtu)

-   **21.8%** stock **cooling electricity** savings (145.5 TBtu)

-   **18.6%** stock **fan electricity** savings (96.5 TBtu).

The HP-RTU + ASHP Boiler + DCV + HR + Economizers package demonstrates
between 49 and 56 million metric tons (MMT CO<sub>2e</sub>) of greenhouse gas
emissions avoided for the three grid electricity scenarios presented, as
well as 50 MMT CO<sub>2e</sub> of greenhouse gas emissions avoided for on-site
natural gas consumption.

# Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge the authors of the original measures in the HP-RTU + ASHP Boiler + DCV + HR + Economizers package: Chris CaraDonna, Janghyun Kim, Korbaga Woldekidan, Andrew Parker, Ryan Meyer, and Amy LeBar. Thank you to the reviewers of this package, Matthew Dahlhausen and Shanti Pless.

# 1. Introduction

This documentation covers the "HP-RTU + ASHP Boiler + DCV + HR +
Economizers" upgrade methodology and briefly discusses key results.
Results can be accessed via the ComStock™ [Published
Datasets](https://nrel.github.io/ComStock.github.io/docs/data.html)
page.

| **Package Title**  | **HP-RTU + ASHP Boiler + DCV + HR + Economizers**  |
| Package Definition | This package upgrades or replaces a wide variety of HVAC systems. It is a combination of five upgrades released in 2023 Releases 1 and 2 and 2024 Release 1: Heat Pump Rooftop Unit (HP-RTU), Air-Source Heat Pump (ASHP)-Boiler, Demand Control Ventilation (DCV), Economizers, and Exhaust Air Heat/Energy Recovery.                  |
| Applicability      | This package is applicable to 85% of the stock floor area. For a package to be applicable, the model must meet the applicability criteria of one or more of the measures.<br>**HP-RTU**: Models that contain gas-fired  or electric resistance RTUs. This measure is applicable to 33% of the stock floor area.<br>**ASHP-Boiler**: Models with a natural gas  boiler for space heating. This measure is applicable to 29% of the stock floor area.<br>**DCV**: All air loops, except those that serve the space types and use HVAC system types listed in the "Not Applicable" section below. Approximately 71% of the stock floor area has one or more air loops eligible for this upgrade.<br>**Exhaust Air Heat/Energy Recovery**: Air handling units (AHU) with outdoor air that do not already have an energy/heat recovery system, including single-zone packaged rooftop units, dedicated outdoor air systems, and multi-zone variable air volume systems. Approximately 78% of the stock floor area has one or more AHUs eligible for this upgrade.<br>**Economizers**: Air systems with ventilation that do not already have economizers. Approximately 57% of the stock floor area has one or more air loops eligible for this upgrade.                              |
| Not Applicable     | *The package was not applicable to 15% of the stock. This means none of the five measures in the package were applied to the model.*<br>**HP-RTU**: Models that do not contain gas-fired or electric resistance RTUs. Not applicable to kitchen spaces.<br>**ASHP-Boiler**: Models not using a natural gas boiler for space heating such as those with a furnace or district heat source.<br>**DCV**: This measure is not applicable to  the following building types: Hotels, Restaurants. This measure is not applicable to the following space types: Kitchen, Dining, Healthcare Patient Room, Laboratory. This measure is also not applicable to models with the following HVAC system types: Dedicated outdoor air system (DOAS), Packaged terminal air-conditioner (PTAC), Packaged terminal heat pump (PTHP).<br>**Exhaust Air Heat/Energy Recovery**: Systems that are not air loops with outdoor air, or systems that already have energy/heat recovery. Additionally, this measure is not applicable to Restaurant building types. **Economizers**: Buildings that already have economizers or do not have ventilation systems.                                       |
| Release            | 2024 Release 1: 2024/comstock_amy2018_release_1/               |

# 2. Technology Summary

Many technologies are used to provide space heating in commercial
building HVAC systems. Packaged rooftop units (RTUs) are currently used
to heat 37% of commercial buildings in the United States (representing
50% of the total commercial floor space) \[1\]. The HP-RTU measure
replaces packaged rooftop unit systems with high-efficiency heat pump
RTUs. Natural gas used by boilers and furnaces accounts for 73% of space
heating end-use energy consumption in the United States \[1\].
Retrofitting natural gas boilers with air-source heat pump (ASHP)
boilers offers a decarbonization solution for this equipment. Heat pumps
offer a high-performance electric option for commercial building space
heating. Their use of electricity for heating enables pathways toward
decarbonization, as they deliver space heating 2--4 times more
efficiently than electric resistance options. Heat pumps currently
provide space heating for only approximately 11% of commercial buildings
(representing 15% of the total floor area) \[1\].

This upgrade package leverages either a high-performance HP-RTU or
ASHP-Boiler retrofit along with other HVAC options that can be applied
to a variety of systems: Economizers, Demand Control Ventilation (DCV),
and Energy/Heat Recovery. Economizers increase outdoor ventilation air
during periods when the system requests cooling and the controls
determine the outdoor air is cold enough to be beneficial. The measure
adds economizer controls to air handling units (AHUs) that do not
already have this functionality. DCV saves energy by reducing the rate
at which outdoor air is delivered during periods of less-than-design
occupancy. This measure will enable DCV for applicable air loops and use
model occupancy schedules to control the DCV. Air-to-air energy/heat
recovery systems exchange heat and/or moisture between conditioned
exhaust air and incoming outdoor ventilation air for AHUs with outdoor
air. They are intended to precondition outdoor ventilation air using
exhaust air before heating/cooling coils are used, which can reduce
ventilation loads. In this measure, energy recovery with sensible and
latent exchange gets added in humid climate zones, whereas heat recovery
with sensible-only exchange gets added in drier climate zones.

The upgrade package applies the five upgrade scenarios based on the
applicability criteria of each individual upgrade. A model will have
all, some, or none of the upgrades applied depending on how the model's
characteristics align with each upgrade's applicability criteria, which
is detailed in Section 3. Note that the HP-RTU and the ASHP-Boiler
retrofit scenarios are mutually exclusive, so no building will have both
applied. Further, the economizer, DCV, and Energy/Heat Recovery measures
can be applied to buildings that received a heat pump retrofit or
existing HVAC systems that are not applicable to the heat pump
retrofits.

For details about each of the five technologies, reference their
individual upgrade documentation:
[HP-RTU](https://nrel.github.io/ComStock.github.io/docs/upgrade_measures/hvac_hp_rtu.html),
[ASHP-Boiler](https://nrel.github.io/ComStock.github.io/docs/upgrade_measures/hvac_ashp_boiler.html),
Economizers, [Exhaust Air Heat/Energy
Recovery](https://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy24osti/87542.pdf), and
[DCV](https://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy24osti/86897.pdf).

# 3. ComStock Baseline Approach

The following sections provide high-level summaries of the ComStock
baseline approach for RTUs, Boilers, Economizers, DCV, and Heat/Energy
Recovery. For more detail about how these systems are modeled in the
ComStock baseline, including data sources, reference the National
Renewable Energy Laboratory's ComStock Reference Documentation report
\[2\].

## 3.1. Rooftop Units

The state of the existing RTUs in ComStock is based on a combination of
when the buildings were built and how the equipment has been updated
over time, described in detail in the ComStock Reference Documentation
report \[2\]. Equipment performance is assumed to meet the energy code
requirements in force at the time and place of installation. For this
reason, most of the existing RTUs are modeled as constant air volume
with single-speed compressors. This is influential to the results in
this analysis because energy savings will be calculated by comparing the
energy performance of the ComStock baseline models to an updated version
of the ComStock models that use the proposed HP-RTUs.

The energy codes in place for the ComStock baseline is shown as a
percentage of applicable floor area in Figure 1. Applicable floor area
for this analysis includes ComStock buildings with "PSZ-AC with gas
coil" and "PSZ-AC with electric coil" HVAC system types (where PSZ-AC
stands for packaged single-zone air conditioner). Most ComStock baseline
RTUs follow energy code requirements from the early 2000s. Other energy
efficiency features such as DCV, energy recovery, and economizer control
are only applied to baseline ComStock RTUs if required by the in-force
energy code for the particular model. The ComStock workflow checks the
necessary characteristics of each RTU to determine if the feature is
required. Similarly, heating, cooling, and fan efficiencies are set
based on the in-force code year. For models with the "PSZ-AC with
electric coil" HVAC system type, the ComStock baseline will use electric
resistance coils with a coefficient of performance (COP) of 1. For
models with the "PSZ-AC with gas coil" HVAC system type, the ComStock
baseline will use a gas furnace efficiency of generally around 80%.

{:refdef: style="text-align: center;"}
![](media\package_5_image1.png)
{:refdef}

{:refdef: style="text-align: center;"}
Figure 1. ComStock baseline in-force energy code followed as a
percentage of applicable floor area. Applicable floor area includes
ComStock buildings with "PSZ-AC with gas coil" and "PSZ-AC with electric
coil" HVAC system types.
{:refdef}

## 3.2. Boilers

The current version of boilers in ComStock are gas-fired, noncondensing
boilers. The efficiencies of the boilers are assigned based on the U.S.
Department of Energy's reference buildings templates and capacities;
Table 1 summarizes the values \[2\]. As indicated in Table 1, three
different performance curves were used to adjust the efficiency of the
boiler based on part-load ratio. All ComStock boilers have a heating set
point of 180°F with a capacity to modulate flow.

Table 1. Boiler Efficiency and Performance Curve Assignment

{:refdef: style="text-align: center;"}
![](media\package_5_image2.png)
{:refdef}

## 3.3. Economizers

ComStock baseline building models include HVAC systems with or without
economizers, and configurations (e.g., control type and high limit) of
economizers vary depending on different building parameters (e.g.,
climate zone). These decisions related to economizer configurations are
determined by the requirements of the energy code that was in force when
the HVAC system was last updated.

Figure 2 shows the prevalence of economizers (in terms of floor area
coverage and contribution to cooling energy) for different subcategories
(building type and ventilation system type) of the existing building
stock. To note, the percentage of floor area shown as true for the
"economizer availability" represents the total building area if there is
at least one economizer available in the building; thus, it does not
mean the actual floor area coverage by the economizers. While there are
buildings that already include economizers in variable air volume (VAV)
systems and roof top units (RTU) covering 40% of the total floor area
and 28% of total electricity used for cooling, the remaining portion of
buildings for those system types does not leverage economizers in the
baseline. HVAC system types such as packaged terminal units, dedicated
outdoor air systems (DOAS), or residential systems without ventilation
are not the target of this upgrade. More detailed information of the
upgrade applicability is described in Section 3.3.2.

{:refdef: style="text-align: center;"}
![](media\package_5_image3.png)
{:refdef}

{:refdef: style="text-align: center;"}
Figure 2. Contribution of ventilation system types on energy
{:refdef}

Figure 3 shows the comparison of economizer coverage with respect to
building floor area between ComStock and estimation from Commercial
Buildings Energy Consumption Survey \[1\]. Again, because of how data
are structured in CBECS, the floor area coverage shown in these figures
is representing the entire floor area of the building if any economizer
is present in any of the HVAC systems in the building, rather than
actual floor area coverage by HVAC systems with economizers. Because
CBECS data only shows total building area instead of total area covered
by the economizers, this comparison is mostly to understand the ballpark
estimation of economizers.

{:refdef: style="text-align: center;"}
![](media\package_5_image4.png)l
{:refdef}

{:refdef: style="text-align: center;"}
Figure 3. Economizer floor area coverage between ComStock and CBECS 2018
{:refdef}

## 3.4. Demand Control Ventilation

DCV is required in ASHRAE 90.1 (2007--present), IECC (2009--present),
and California Title 24 (1996--present) energy codes. DCV is included in
ComStock models when required by the governing ASHRAE 90.1 energy code
for the specific spaces/systems in the model. ComStock gathers the
necessary criteria for determining DCV requirements and includes DCV
functionality only if the space/system requires. Requirement criteria
for DCV includes space floor area, space design occupant density, system
economizer prevalence, system design outdoor airflow rate, and system
energy recovery prevalence. The 90.1 code year for a model is based on
the year of the model's last major HVAC replacement. A summary of the
floor area served by a system with DCV is shown in Table 2. Note that
DCV is not required by ASHRAE 90.1 when an HVAC system has an energy
recovery ventilator (ERV).

Table 2. Fraction of Floor Area Controlled by HVAC System with DCV by
Building Type and Code Year

<table><thead><tr class="header"><th>Building Type</th><th><blockquote><p>DOE Ref Pre-1980</p></blockquote></th><th><blockquote><p>DOE Ref 1980-2004</p></blockquote></th><th><blockquote><p>90.1-2004</p></blockquote></th><th><blockquote><p>90.1-2007</p></blockquote></th><th><blockquote><p>90.1-2010</p></blockquote></th><th><blockquote><p>90.1-2013</p></blockquote></th><th><blockquote><p>DEER Pre-1975</p></blockquote></th><th><blockquote><p>DEER 1985</p></blockquote></th><th><blockquote><p>DEER 1996</p></blockquote></th><th><blockquote><p>DEER 2003</p></blockquote></th><th><blockquote><p>DEER 2007</p></blockquote></th><th><blockquote><p>DEER 2011</p></blockquote></th><th><blockquote><p>DEER 2014</p></blockquote></th><th><blockquote><p>DEER 2015</p></blockquote></th><th><blockquote><p>DEER 2017</p></blockquote></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr class="odd"><td><p>FullService</p><p>Restaurant</p></td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0.263</td><td>0.091</td><td>0.197</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0.559</td><td>0.561</td><td>0.567</td><td>0.541</td><td>0.568</td><td>0.549</td></tr><tr class="even"><td>Hospital</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0.387</td><td>0.423</td><td>0.376</td><td>0.154</td><td>0.226</td><td>0.389</td></tr><tr class="odd"><td>LargeHotel</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0.009</td><td>0.005</td><td>0.023</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0.073</td><td>0.067</td><td>0.051</td><td>0.125</td><td>0.059</td><td>0.143</td></tr><tr class="even"><td>LargeOffice</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr class="odd"><td>MediumOffice</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr class="even"><td>Outpatient</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0.048</td><td>0.015</td><td>0.011</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr class="odd"><td>PrimarySchool</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0.507</td><td>0.023</td><td>0.033</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0.825</td><td>0.806</td><td>0.789</td><td>0.773</td><td>0.823</td><td>0.715</td></tr><tr class="even"><td>QuickService Restaurant</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0.017</td><td>0.008</td><td>0.033</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0.387</td><td>0.388</td><td>0.351</td><td>0.349</td><td>0.366</td><td>0.362</td></tr><tr class="odd"><td>RetailStandalone</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr class="even"><td>RetailStripmall</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0.204</td><td>0.036</td><td>0.025</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0.185</td><td>0.169</td><td>0.163</td><td>0.165</td><td>0.168</td><td>0.113</td></tr><tr class="odd"><td>SecondarySchool</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0.040</td><td>0.512</td><td>0.008</td><td>0.022</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0.772</td><td>0.693</td><td>0.756</td><td>0.830</td><td>0.809</td><td>0.662</td></tr><tr class="even"><td>SmallHotel</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0.002</td><td>0</td><td>0.000</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr class="odd"><td>SmallOffice</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr class="even"><td>Warehouse</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr></tbody></table>

One important observation from these data is that no office buildings
include DCV in the ComStock baseline. This is because office buildings
are currently modeled using a single, blended space type that is a
fractional mix of open offices, enclosed offices, conference rooms,
etc., and the occupancy density of this blended space does not exceed
the DCV thresholds in ASHARE 90.1. This leads to unrealistically low
(0%) DCV in office buildings in the baseline building stock, which may
overestimate the savings for stock-wide DCV implementation.

For more details about how DCV is modeled in the ComStock baseline, see
the ComStock Reference Documentation \[2\].

## 3.5. Exhaust Air Heat/Energy Recovery

The ComStock baseline includes energy recovery in AHUs only when
required by the governing energy code standard. The fraction of floor
area conditioned by energy/heat recovery in ComStock is summarized in
Table 4 by building type and energy code year. Note that older code
years do not include heat/energy recovery, as they were not required by
these energy codes. Also note that California models generally do not
include heat/energy recovery because these models follow California
Title 24 energy codes, which do not have heat/energy recovery
requirements. The operation and performance of heat/energy recovery
systems in the ComStock baseline are not discussed in this work because
existing heat/energy recovery systems are not affected by this measure.
More information about the ComStock baseline heat/energy recovery
systems can be found in the ComStock Reference Documentation \[2\].

The prevalence of heat/energy recovery in the ComStock baseline directly
impacts the results of this analysis, as the measure will only be
applied to AHUs that do not already include heat/energy recovery. Note
that ComStock adds heat/energy recovery to models on an AHU-by-AHU
basis, meaning a ComStock baseline model may have some AHUs with
heat/energy recovery and some without, based on the code requirements.
This measure is also applied on an AHU basis, so it may be partially
applicable to some ComStock models. The ComStock code-driven approach
for applying heat/energy recovery is reasonable but difficult to
validate. The most prominent commercial building stock assessment,
CBECS, does not include prevalence of heat/energy recovery systems
\[1\]. Because heat/energy recovery code requirements often depend on
system size, ComStock's estimates may either overstate or underestimate
the prevalence of existing systems with heat/energy recovery due to
zoning assumptions. This, in turn, affects the number of systems that
this measure upgrades and subsequently impacts the overall energy-saving
potential of the technology in the building stock.

The benefits of heat/energy recovery systems depend on routing exhaust
air through the heat exchanger. As discussed, some portion of the
exhaust air in buildings may not be routed back to the central exhaust
or heat exchanger, either due to duct leakage or separate exhaust fans.
ComStock includes exhaust fans in some space types, summarized in Table
3. Note that some prominent building types, such as small/medium/large
office, warehouse, and retail, do not currently include any zone
exhaust, so all exhaust air is assumed to return to the AHUs and become
available for heat/energy recovery benefits, when applicable.
Furthermore, ComStock models do not currently include duct leakage.
These factors may overestimate the amount of exhaust air available for
heat/energy recovery in ComStock models.

Table 3. Building and Space Types in ComStock Modeled With Zone
Exhaust Fans

{:refdef: style="text-align: center;"}
![](media\package_5_table_3.png)
{:refdef}

Table 4. Fraction of ComStock Floor Area Conditioned by Systems With
Heat/Energy Recovery by Building Type and Code Year

DEER stands for the Database of Energy Efficiency Resources, which is
used to implement Title 24 energy codes in ComStock California models.

{:refdef: style="text-align: center;"}
![](media\package_5_image6.png)
{:refdef}

# 4.  Modeling Approach

The following sections summarize the modeling approach and applicability
for each of the 5 individual measures included in the HP-RTU + ASHP
Boiler + DCV + HR + Economizers upgrade package. For more detailed
descriptions, reference the individual upgrade documents.

## 4.1. Heat Pump Rooftop Unit

The [Heat Pump Rooftop Unit
upgrade](https://nrel.github.io/ComStock.github.io/docs/upgrade_measures/hvac_hp_rtu.html)
replaces RTUs with HP-RTUs where applicable. The HP-RTUs are modeled
using the EnergyPlus<sup>®</sup> "AirloopHVAC:UnitarySystem" object \[3\]. An
OpenStudio<sup>®</sup> upgrade is used in conjunction with the ComStock workflow
to modify/remove any applicable RTUs in the ComStock baseline models
("PSZ-AC with gas coil" and "PSZ-AC with electric coil") and articulate
the appropriate HP-RTU objects and settings. Nonapplicable systems are
not affected, nor are core operational parameters of systems such as
schedules, thermostat set points, unoccupied operation behavior, and
design outdoor airflow rates. Furthermore, energy-saving features found
in applicable baseline RTUs such as air-side heat/energy recovery,
economizers, or DCV are preserved as-is for the new HP-RTU systems. This
enables comparability, noting that these features are feasible and
available in HP-RTU systems. The modeling details of the HP-RTU system
are described further in the individual upgrade documentation.

Heat pumps in colder climates usually require a source of supplemental
heat, which today is often sized to meet the entirety of the heating
load. This is because heat pump capacity is reduced as outdoor ambient
temperatures decrease, which generally corresponds to the highest
heating loads for the building. The supplemental heat source is often
electric resistance, which has an effective site COP of 1, whereas the
heat pump system will often demonstrate a site COP much higher than this
even at temperatures down to −17.8°C. Sizing heat pump systems to
address more of the heating load is sometimes suggested because the heat
pump heating is more efficient than electric resistance, so long as the
sizing of the heat pump system still enables effective operation for
both heating and cooling \[4\], \[5\]. However, this analysis simply
sizes the heat pumps based on cooling load, and reserves studying the
impact of other sizing approaches for future analyses.

Key assumption include:

-   The new HP-RTUs are modeled with top-of-the-line variable-speed
    compressors and fans. Performance curves are used to determine how
    efficiency and capacity vary with indoor and outdoor temperature and
    part-load ratio, including cycling losses. At full compressor speed,
    the performance curves yield 56% and 46% COP and capacity retention
    at 0°F, respectively.

-   The heat pump system is sized to the design cooling load, with
    supplemental heating used to address any additional loads.

-   The supplemental heating coil matches the fuel type of the original
    heating system. If the original RTU used gas heating, a new gas
    supplemental heating coil with a COP of 0.8 is used in the new
    HP-RTU. If the original RTU used electric heating, an electric
    resistance supplemental heating coil with a COP of 1 is used.

-   The minimum operating temperature for the heat pumps is modeled at
    0°F, which is the default setting for some manufacturers. The
    compressor will lock out below this temperature, and only
    supplemental heat will be available.

### 4.1.1. Applicability

The HP-RTU upgrade is applicable to ComStock models with either gas
furnace RTUs ("PSZ-AC with gas coil") or electric resistance RTUs
("PSZ-AC with electric coil"). ComStock HVAC distributions are informed
by the 2018 CBECS \[1\]. The methodology for interpreting CBECS data to
create HVAC probability distributions for ComStock is discussed in the
ComStock documentation \[2\]. The upgrade is also not applicable to
space types that directly serve kitchens, spaces that are unconditioned,
or RTUs with outdoor air ratios above 65% (due to an EnergyPlus<sup>®</sup> bug
with cycling operation).

## 4.2. Air-Source Heat Pump Boiler

The [Air-Source Heat Pump Boiler
upgrade](https://nrel.github.io/ComStock.github.io/docs/upgrade_measures/hvac_ashp_boiler.html)
replaces natural gas boilers for space heating with ASHP boilers.
Outputs from the simulation runs could be used to quantify the carbon
reduction and energy impact of the electrification.

The upgrade provides multiple options for the natural gas boiler
replacement. The following list summarizes the upgrade inputs and their
default values used in the simulation run.

-   The hot water setpoint is set to 140°F and the heating coils are
    auto-sized using this new setpoint.

-   The heat pump is sized using an outdoor air temperature of 17°F. A
    maximum design capacity of 40 kW is used; if the model requires a
    higher capacity, multiple units will be added in the loop. A COP of
    2.85 is assumed for the design outdoor air temperature.

-   Electric resistance heating is assumed to be the backup heat source,
    as opposed to keeping the existing boiler.

### 4.2.1. Applicability

This upgrade is applicable to the ComStock OpenStudio models with the
following HVAC system types: DOAS with fan coil air-cooled chiller with
boiler, DOAS with fan coil chiller with boiler, DOAS with fan coil
district chilled water with boiler, DOAS with water-source heat pump
cooling tower with boiler, packaged single zone air conditioner (PSZ-AC)
with gas boiler, packaged variable air volume (PVAV) with gas boiler,
PVAV with gas heat with electric reheat, variable air volume (VAV)
air-cooled chiller with gas boiler reheat, VAV chiller with gas boiler
reheat, and VAV district chilled water with gas boiler reheat.

## 4.3. Economizers

This measure enables dry-bulb or enthalpy-based air-side economizing in
air systems depending on climate zone if not already present. The
measure cycles through air loops checking for eligibility for the
upgrade. If an air loop does not have outdoor air or already has a DOAS
system or existing economizer, it is not eligible for the upgrade. For
air loops that are eligible for the upgrade, the model gets the climate
zone and sets the economizer type (FixedDryBulb, FixedEnthalpy, or
FixedDewPointAndDryBulb) based on ASHRAE 90.1 requirements by climate
zone. The measure then adds economizers to eligible air loops. More
details are described in subsequent sections.

### 4.3.1. Configuration of Economizers

Specifics of a newly added economizer through an upgrade are applied in
the same way as in models that already have economizers. In other words,
configurations (e.g., control type and limit setting) are guided by the
requirements of the energy code that was in force when the HVAC system
was last updated. Each version of energy code (i.e., ASHRAE 90.1 or
Title 24) includes best practices for leveraging economizers (depending
on HVAC system size) as well as configuring economizers (depending on
the climate zone). For example, ASHRAE 90.1-2010 includes information on
preferable control types, prohibited control types, and high limits for
fixed control types as shown in Table 5. While some details vary between
versions, these suggestions largely reflect physical reasonings such as
considering temperature as well as humidity (i.e., prohibiting dry-bulb
controls) measurements when the building is in humid regions (e.g., 1a,
2a, 3a, or 4a). More details on ComStock's economizer implementations
are described in the ComStock Reference Documentation \[2\].

Table 5. Economizer *C*onfiguration *S*uggestions in ASHRAE 90.1-2010

{:refdef: style="text-align: center;"}
![](media\package_5_image7.png)
{:refdef}

### 4.3.2. Applicability

The applicability criterion of the economizer upgrade is simple:
Economizers will be installed in buildings including air system with
ventilation (i.e., AHUs and RTUs) that do not have economizers. Figure 4
shows the coverage of baseline buildings on floor area and highlights
the economizer control types including floor area without economizers.
The economizer upgrade will target the floor area without economizers
shown in the figure for corresponding HVAC systems; however, the amount
of savings will be determined by the weather, building's outdoor air
requirement, heat gain level in the return air stream, and configuration
of the economizer.

{:refdef: style="text-align: center;"}
![](media\package_5_image8.png)
{:refdef}

{:refdef: style="text-align: center;"}
Figure 4. Upgrade applicability on building stock cooling energy
{:refdef}

## 4.4. Demand Control Ventilation

This measure will cycle through the outdoor air loops in a model and
enable DCV for air loops serving applicable space types. This will set
the DCV field in the mechanical ventilation controller to "Yes" from
"No." As ComStock building models do not track CO<sub>2</sub> levels, the models'
occupancy schedules will be used to control the DCV.

For the EnergyPlus DCV function to work properly, a space needs both a
per-person and per-area outdoor air rate specified. In OpenStudio
Standards, some space types have either 100% per-person or 100% per-area
outdoor air rates specified. For these spaces on applicable air loops,
outdoor air rates are converted to a per-person rate of 10 CFM/person,
and the remainder of the outdoor air requirement is assigned as
per-area.

### 4.4.1. Applicability

Hotels and restaurants will not be modified by the measure. Hotels
typically have either single zone unitary systems (e.g., PTAC, PTHP) or
DOAS meeting HVAC needs, neither of which are suitable for DCV. Air
loops that serve a space type without a code-defined per-person
ventilation rate will not have this measure applied. Due to high
concentration of heat and effluents, kitchens and restaurants often
require the design outdoor airflow rate all day to maintain indoor air
quality and should not have the outdoor airflow reduced at periods of
lower occupancy.

There are also certain space types for which DCV is not appropriate and
will be skipped in this measure. The following space types will not be
modified:

-   Kitchens

-   Dining

-   Laboratories

-   Healthcare patient spaces

-   Corridors and stairwells

-   Mechanical rooms

-   Data centers

-   High exhaust spaces, such as restrooms and locker rooms.

For the reasons listed above, kitchens in non-restaurant buildings will
not have DCV applied. Dining areas in these buildings will also not have
DCV applied because these areas frequently use transfer air from
kitchens.

In hospitals, proper ventilation and indoor air quality must be
maintained to ensure infection control and patient safety. For this
reason, hospital space types dealing with patient care will not have DCV
applied (e.g., patient, radiology, exam, and surgical rooms).
Non-patient space types such as offices will have DCV applied.
Additionally, laboratory space types found in hospitals will not have
DCV applied per energy code guidance.

Air loops that serve both applicable and inapplicable space types will
have DCV applied but will only function in spaces that are applicable.
To do this, inapplicable space types will have their outdoor air rates
converted to 100% per-area to avoid triggering the EnergyPlus function.

In addition to the space type and building type applicability
constraints above, any model with a DOAS will not have DCV applied at
this time. In addition, models with single-zone unitary systems (e.g.,
PTAC, PTHP) will not have DCV applied because they are entirely reliant
on occupants to manually control the ventilation air and are unable to
be controlled using occupancy or CO<sub>2</sub> sensors. Models with ERVs are not
required by ASHRAE 90.1 to have DCV, but it will be added to models with
ERV in this measure to represent optimal operating conditions.

## 4.5. Exhaust Air Heat/Energy Recovery

The measure applies heat recovery to applicable AHUs in drier climate
zones (ASHRAE climate zones 3B, 3C, 4B, 4C, 5B, 5C, and 6B) where
addressing latent energy loads is of lesser concern. The heat recovery
is modeled as aluminum counterflow plate heat exchangers and includes a
bypass for temperature control and economizer lockout where applicable.
Note that this measure does not modify the prevalence or operation of
economizers in the existing AHUs; these properties are retained from the
baseline ComStock model.

The measure applies energy recovery to applicable AHUs in humid climate
zones where addressing latent loads with energy recovery would be
beneficial. The energy recovery systems are modeled as membrane
counterflow heat exchangers and include a bypass for temperature control
and economizer lockout where applicable.

### 4.5.1. Applicability

The measure is applicable to all AHUs in the ComStock baseline that do
not already include heat/energy recovery, excluding food service
applications. Although there is evidence to suggest that exhaust air
recovery can be applied to kitchen exhaust hoods, there are additional
considerations that need to be factored in to meaningfully model the
application, and these are beyond the scope of this study. As discussed,
heat/energy recovery in the ComStock baseline are added if required by
the governing energy code (Table 4). Note that some models may include a
mix of applicable and nonapplicable AHUs. The measure is applied on a
per-AHU basis, and therefore may be partially applicable to some
ComStock models based on the prevalence of heat/energy recovery in the
existing AHUs. AHUs for this study include VAV systems, packaged RTUs,
and DOAS. The prevalence of these systems is shown in Figure 5 for
ComStock floor area with (left) and without (right) heat/energy
recovery. The applicable ComStock floor area served by AHU-based systems
that do not already have heat/energy recovery is about 70% (Figure 6).

{:refdef: style="text-align: center;"}
![](media\package_5_image9.png)
{:refdef}

{:refdef: style="text-align: center;"}
Figure 5. Weighted area of ComStock baseline by HVAC system type
grouping for systems with existing ERV/HRV (not applicable to measure)
and without heat/energy recovery (applicable to measure)
{:refdef}

{:refdef: style="text-align: center;"}
![](media\package_5_image10.png)
{:refdef}

{:refdef: style="text-align: center;"}
Figure 6. Summary of heat/energy recovery measure applicability for
each building type
{:refdef}

Existing HR/ER: Floor area with current heat/energy recovery systems. NA
HR/ER: Floor area without energy/heat recovery, not upgradeable with
this measure. Added HR/ER: Floor area served by systems upgraded with
heat/energy recovery as part of this measure.

## 4.6 Greenhouse Gas Emissions

Three electricity grid scenarios are presented to compare the emissions
of the ComStock baseline and the HP-RTU + ASHP Boiler + DCV + HR +
Economizers scenario. The choice of grid scenario will impact the grid
emissions factors used in the simulation, which determines the
corresponding emissions produced per kilowatt-hour. Two
scenarios---Long-Run Marginal Emissions Rate (LRMER) High Renewable
Energy (RE) Cost 15-Year and LRMER Low RE Cost 15-Year---use the Cambium
data set, and the last uses the Emissions & Generation Resource
Integrated Database (eGRID) data set \[6\], \[7\]. All three scenarios
vary the emissions factors geospatially to reflect the variation in grid
resources used to produce electricity across the United States. The
Cambium data sets also vary emissions factors seasonally and by time of
day. This study does not imply a preference for any particular grid
emissions scenario, but other analysis suggests that the choice of grid
emissions scenario can impact results \[8\] . Emissions due to on-site
combustion of fossil fuels use the emissions factors shown in Table 6,
which are from Table 7.1.2(1) of the draft American National Standards
Institute/Residential Energy Services Network/International Code Council
301 \[9\]. To compare total emissions due to both on-site fossil fuel
consumption and grid electricity generation, the emissions from a single
electricity grid scenario should be combined with all three on-site
fossil fuel emissions.

Table 6. On-Site Fossil Fuel Emissions Factors

{:refdef: style="text-align: center;"}
![](media\package_5_table_6.png)
<sup>a</sup> lb = pound; MMBtu = million British thermal units; kg = kilogram; MWh = megawatt-hour   
{:refdef}

## 4.7. Limitations and Concerns

In general, real buildings may have limitations beyond what has been
included in the upgrades' applicability criteria that could affect the
upgrade results. The following subsections detail the limitations and
concerns for the two heat pump upgrades.

### 4.7.1. Heat Pump Rooftop Unit

Limited comprehensive heat pump performance maps exist, which are
required for detailed energy modeling. Consequently, understanding of
heat pump performance and operation in this work is also limited. Heat
pump modeling is sensitive to performance assumptions due to the strong
relationship between efficiency and capacity with outdoor air
temperature. This impacts both annual energy consumption and peak
demand. This work attempts to use the most informative data available
and makes documented assumptions about heat pump operation and
performance. These will notably impact results. Please consider these
assumptions.

Stock savings are sensitive to ComStock baseline assumptions. Compared
to CBECS 2012, which is another prominent data source for commercial
building stock energy usage, ComStock currently shows lower gas heating
consumption and higher electric heating consumption \[10\]. This can
affect the net impact of converting both gas furnace and electric
resistance RTUs to HP-RTUs.

Lastly, there is a known EnergyPlus bug regarding cycling operation for
multispeed coil objects. This can cause the modeled HP-RTU systems to
cycle at higher part-load fractions than the baseline single-speed RTU
systems. Many units are only minimally impacted by this since the HP-RTU
systems are variable speed and can turn down to lower part-load
fractions.

### 4.7.2. Air-Source Heat Pump Boiler

Some of the boilers in the baseline ComStock models do not have minimum
load turndown control. This allows a small flow with insignificant
heating in the hot water loop. This had a negative impact during the
application of this upgrade, as the upgrade introduces a heat pump loop
that is triggered by a nonzero flow in the hot water loop. The small
flow in the hot water loop forces the heat pump to cycle frequently and
eventually affects the expected savings from the application of this
upgrade. This issue should be addressed in the next version of the
ComStock models.

Another limitation is the current version of the heat pump object used
in this upgrade, the plant loop energy input ratio heating heat pump.
This object is a constant flow model that requests full design flow from
the plant. This limits the ability to model variable speed heat pumps
and forces the heat pump to cycle more. This upgrade should be updated
in the future once the updated version of the heat pump object with a
variable speed option is available.

### 4.7.3. Economizers

In the current version of ComStock, two faults related to the
economizers are implemented in the "baseline" simulations: incorrect
changeover (high limit) temperature fault for fixed dry-bulb control and
damper fully closed fault. Assumptions (detailed in the ComStock
Reference Documentation \[2\]) such as fault prevalence, fault
incidence, fault intensity, etc., are made to reflect differences
between different faults. While these two faults are reflected in the
baseline simulations, we made a judgement to include damper fully closed
fault in upgrade simulations as well. We are assuming that the incorrect
changeover temperature fault that is mostly caused by poor commissioning
is minimized (i.e., not included in upgrade simulations) by best
practices conducted in the latest market. However, the fully damper
closed fault that is initially and automatically triggered by
malfunctioning or broken damper linkage is considered as an inherent
probabilistic issue even with the new economizer upgrade.

Although faults (e.g., damper fully closed) are implemented with fixed
prevalence (e.g., 35%), the actual percentage of economizers being
faulted (among applicable economizers) is less than the defined
prevalence due to current implementation limitation. For example, 35% of
randomly selected buildings that include certain HVAC system types (that
are categorized as the air system) are assigned to have the damper fully
closed fault. However, there are cases where these air systems assigned
to have an economizer fault do not even qualify to have an economizer
when the cooling capacity is below a certain threshold (defined by the
energy code). In other words, the current limitation is that the random
selection of faulted economizers is not fully aligned with buildings
that actually have economizers. In this case, we are losing a sample
that is selected by 35% prevalence, resulting in decreased
representation of fault prevalence in the final building stock.
Additional to sampling limitations, another limitation is that the
economizer faults are currently not applied to packaged single zone
systems due to incorrect applicability implementation.

In reality, California's Title 24 energy code requires fault detection
and diagnostics for economizers, which prevents and quickly mitigates
some but not all faults that can occur in economizers. However, the
current version of ComStock does not reflect the preventative or quickly
resolving fault detection and diagnostics methodologies, thus possibly
overestimating the degraded impact of faults in buildings in California.

While the representation of faults in this upgrade is underestimated due
to the limitation described above, it should be noted that the savings
shown in the results still reflect the impact of faults. For example, a
newly added economizer through an upgrade has a chance (less than 35%)
of having a damper closed fault for a month in a year. If the outdoor
air conditioning was favorable (or unfavorable) for economizing during
the faulted period, then the fault causes negative (or positive) impact
on energy savings through the upgrade. Note that the fully closed damper
fault impacts both negatively and positively on the energy consumption,
while the positive energy savings by not introducing (hotter) outside
air cause indoor air quality issues.

As not all buildings are configured in the same way and in the optimal
way, our building models include variability between models. For
example, depending on the HVAC system and building type, we have RTUs
that either (1) run fans along with ventilation over the entire night,
(2) only cycle fans (with ventilation) based on thermostat settings, or
(3) only cycle fans (without ventilation) based on thermostat settings.
When an economizer upgrade is applied to a building that initially has
RTU with option \#1, the current modeling workflow implements the
economizer in an unreasonable way. One example is a building with a RTU
serving a single zone where, in the baseline, a fixed positioned outdoor
air damper in the RTU always provides a certain fraction of fresh air
into the building overnight. When the economizer upgrade is applied, now
the economizer tries to introduce outdoor air based on mixed air
temperature setpoint. In these buildings showing negative heating
savings, the economizer is bringing much more outdoor air (compared to
the baseline model) when the outside is cold, resulting is overcooled
indoor spaces where the zone temperatures fall below the heating
setpoint of occupied hours (but still higher than setback heating
setpoint). Thus, in the beginning of the day, heating systems start to
operate to maintain heating setpoint. This issue is not considered as a
common phenomenon in the field; improvement will be made in future
analyses.

### 4.7.4. Demand Control Ventilation

There is one notable model group excluded from ComStock's baseline DCV
application: offices. We expect to see especially high energy savings
from this measure in this group. It is important to note that these
savings numbers are likely overestimates, as many of the actual
buildings in this group use DCV.

### 4.7.5. Exhaust Air Heat/Energy Recovery

The most prominent limitation of this study is a lack of data on the
prevalence of once-through air delivery systems that do not exhaust air
at the AHU, but rather through a dedicated exhaust fan. This complicates
adding a heat/energy recovery system because the exhaust air and outdoor
ventilation air need to pass through the same heat exchanger to achieve
energy recovery benefits. If air is exhausted across multiple separate
locations, additional work may be required to route the airstreams to
the same location. Otherwise, the portion of exhaust air not passing
through the heat/energy recovery system will not be utilized for energy
recovery, which can limit the effectiveness of the system.

ComStock does account for zone exhaust fans in some building types, but
not in offices, retail buildings, or warehouses, which are prominent
building types. Furthermore, ComStock does not currently account for
duct leakage. A PNNL study using the DOE prototype models assumes that
90% of exhaust air is available for energy recovery to account for both
zone exhaust and duct losses \[11\]. To account for this, the
energy/heat recovery measure assumes that 90% of return air is available
for recovery. However, it is unclear how realistic this assumption is,
and how it might vary between buildings, which can impact the savings of
this measure. Overestimating the return air fraction would increase the
savings suggested by this measure.

Lastly, the prevalence of heat/energy recovery in ComStock baseline AHUs
is based on code requirements for the HVAC code year of each model.
However, no data sources were found to validate the fraction of floor
area of the building stock against what ComStock assumes using the
code-baseline methodology. Heat/energy recovery prevalence impacts the
measure savings, as heat/energy recovery prevalence in existing AHUs is
inversely proportional to the number of applicable AHUs for the measure
and therefore the stock-level savings achieved from the measure.
Moreover, heat and energy recovery code requirements frequently depend
on the size of the system. ComStock relies on assumptions about zoning
to determine system size, but inaccuracies in these assumptions can
result in inaccuracies in estimating the potential applicability of
adding heat/energy recovery to systems that do not already include it.

# 5. Output Variables

Table 7 includes a list of output variables that are calculated in
ComStock by the upgrades included in this upgrade package. These
variables are important in terms of understanding the differences
between buildings with and without the HP-RTU + ASHP Boiler + DCV + HR +
Economizers upgrade package applied. These output variables can also be
used for understanding the economics of the upgrades (e.g., return on
investment) if cost information (i.e., material, labor, and maintenance
costs for technology implementation) is available.

Table 7. Output Variables Calculated From the Upgrade Applications

  | Upgrade                          | Variable   Name                                             | Description                                                                                                       |
|----------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| HP-RTU                           | stat.hvac_count_dx_cooling_XX_to_XX_kbtuh                   | Total number of direct expansion (DX) cooling units within a size bin                                             |
|                                  | stat.hvac_count_dx_heating_XX_to_XX_kbtuh                   | Total number of DX heating units within a size bin                                                                |
|                                  | stat.hvac_count_heat_pumps_XX_to_XX_kbtuh                   | Total number of heat pump units within a size bin                                                                 |
|                                  | stat.dx_cooling_average_cop..COP                            | Average operational COP (compressor only) of DX cooling models during   simulation                                |
|                                  | stat.dx_cooling_capacity_tons..tons                         | Total tons of DX cooling modeled                                                                                  |
|                                  | stat.dx_cooling_design_cop..COP                             | Average rated (compressor only) COP of DX cooling units at rated   conditions                                     |
|                                  | stat.dx_heating_average_cop..COP                            | Average operational COP (compressor only) of DX cooling models during   simulation                                |
|                                  | stat.dx_heating_average_minimum_operating_temperature..C    | Average compressor minimum heating lockout temperature, below which the   heat pump heating will be disabled (°C) |
|                                  | stat.dx_heating_average_total_cop..COP                      | Average effective COP of DX heating. This includes energy from the   defrost cycle and any supplemental heating   |
|                                  | stat.dx_heating_capacity_at_XXF..kBtu_per_hr                | Average available heat pump capacity at a given temperature (kBtu/h)                                              |
|                                  | stat.dx_heating_capacity_at_rated..kBtu_per_hr              | Average available heat pump capacity at rated temperature (47°F)                                                  |
|                                  | stat.dx_heating_design_cop..COP                             | Average design COP of heat pumps                                                                                  |
|                                  | stat.dx_heating_design_cop_XXf..COP                         | Heat pump COP at given temperature, or rated conditions (47°F)                                                    |
|                                  | stat.dx_heating_fraction_electric_defrost                   | Fraction of heat pump electric defrost energy to DX heating energy                                                |
|                                  | stat.dx_heating_fraction_electric_supplemental              | Fraction of heat pump electric supplemental heating energy to DX heating   energy                                 |
|                                  | stat.dx_heating_supplemental_capacity_electric..kBtu_per_hr | Electric coil supplemental heating capacity (kBtu/h)                                                              |
|                                  | stat.dx_heating_supplemental_capacity_gas..kBtu_per_hr      | Gas coil supplemental heating capacity (kBtu/h)                                                                   |
|                                  | stat.dx_heating_supplemental_capacity..kBtu_per_hr          | Total (gas or electric) supplemental heating capacity (kBtu/h)                                                    |
|                                  | stat.dx_heating_fraction_supplemental                       | Fraction of heat pump heating energy from supplemental heating                                                    |
|                                  | stat.dx_heating_total_dx_electric..J                        | Total heat pump heating electric load (J)                                                                         |
|                                  | stat.dx_heating_total_dx_load..J                            | Total heat pump heating load (J)                                                                                  |
|                                  | stat.dx_heating_total_load..J                               | Total heat pump system heating load (J)                                                                           |
|                                  | stat.dx_heating_total_supplemental_load_gas..J              | Total heating output energy from gas supplemental coil (J)                                                        |
|                                  | stat.dx_heating_total_supplemental_load_electric..J         | Total heating output energy from electric supplemental coil (J)                                                   |
|                                  | stat.dx_heating_defrost_energy..kBtu                        | Total heat pump electricity energy for defrost (kBtu)                                                             |
|                                  | stat.dx_heating_ratio_defrost                               | Ratio of heat pump defrost electricity to heat pump heating energy                                                |
|                                  | stat.hours_below_XXF..hr                                    | Number of hours below given outdoor air temperature during simulation                                             |
| ASHP Boiler                      | Heat pump capacity weighted design COP                      | COP of the heat pump at the rated design conditions                                                               |
|                                  | Heat pump average COP                                       | Average heat pump COP                                                                                             |
|                                  | Heat pump total load                                        | Total heating provided by heat pump (J)                                                                           |
|                                  | Boiler total load                                           | Total heating provided by boiler (J)                                                                              |
|                                  | Heat pump total electricity                                 | Total electricity consumption by heat pump (J)                                                                    |
|                                  | Boiler total electricity                                    | Total electricity consumption by boiler (J)                                                                       |
|                                  | Heat pump capacity                                          | Heat pump capacity (kBtu/h)                                                                                       |
|                                  | Count heat pumps                                            | Count of heat pumps                                                                                               |
|                                  | Count heat pumps 0–300 kBtuh                                | Count of heat pumps in the range of 0–300 kBtu/h capacity                                                         |
|                                  | Count heat pumps 300–2,500 kBtuh                            | Count of heat pumps in the range of 300–2,500 kBtu/h capacity                                                     |
|                                  | Count heat pumps 2,500+ kBtuh                               | Count of heat pumps with more than 2,500 kBtu/h capacity                                                          |
|                                  | Hot water loop total load                                   | Total heating load in the hot water loop (J)                                                                      |
|                                  | Hot water loop boiler fraction                              | Fraction of heating load provided by boiler                                                                       |
|                                  | Hot water loop heat pump fraction                           | Fraction of heating load provided by heat pump                                                                    |
| Economizers                      | area_fraction_with_economizer                               | Total area covered by HVAC system with economizer                                                                 |
|                                  | num_air_loops_economizer                                    | Total number of economizers in the building HVAC systems                                                          |
|                                  | average_outdoor_air_fraction                                | Weighted (based on mass flow rate) average outdoor air fraction                                                   |
|                                  | economizer_control_type                                     | Dominant economizer control type in the building with respect to airflow                                          |
|                                  | economizer_high_limit_temperature..c                        | Economizer highlimit (temperature [oC]) for fixed dry-bulb control. -999 for a building without highlimit         |
|                                  | economizer_high_limit_enthalpy..j_per_kg                    | Economizer highlimit (enthalpy [J/kg]) for fixed enthalpy control. -999 for a building without highlimit.         |
| Demand Control Ventilation       | Initial condition                                           | Number of air loops with DCV before the measure is applied                                                        |
|                                  | Final condition                                             | Number of air loops with DCV after the measure is applied                                                         |
| Exhaust Air Heat/Energy Recovery | stat.area_fraction_with_heat_recovery                       | Fraction of model floor area served by an AHU with heat/energy recovery                                           |
|                                  | stat.num_air_loops_heat_recovery                            | Number of airloops with heat/energy recovery in model (unweighted)                                                |
|                                  | stat.num_air_loops                                          | Number of airloops in model (unweighted)                                                                          |

# 6. Results

In this section, results are presented both at the stock level and for
individual buildings through savings distributions. Stock-level results
include the combined impact of all the analyzed buildings in ComStock,
including buildings that are not applicable to this upgrade. Therefore,
they do not necessarily represent the energy savings of a particular or
average building. Stock-level results should not be interpreted as the
savings that a building might realize by implementing the HP-RTU + ASHP
Boiler + DCV + HR + Economizers upgrade package.

Total site energy savings are also presented in this section. Total site
energy savings can be a useful metric, especially for quality
assurance/quality control, but this metric on its own can have
limitations for drawing conclusions. Further context should be
considered, as site energy savings alone do not necessarily translate
proportionally to savings for a particular fuel type (e.g., gas or
electricity), source energy savings, cost savings, or greenhouse gas
savings. This is especially important when an upgrade impacts multiple
fuel types or causes decreased consumption of one fuel type and
increased consumption of another. Many factors should be considered when
analyzing the impact of an energy efficiency or electrification
strategy, depending on the use case.

## 6.1. Realized Applicability

Figure 7 provides a breakdown of the applicability of the HP-RTU + ASHP
Boiler + DCV + HR + Economizers package by individual measure. The
individual component measures were applicable to between 29% and 78% of
the stock floor area. Heat Recovery had the highest applicability at
78%. The ASHP-Boiler measure had the lowest applicability at 29% of the
floor area, which is to be expected because of the prevalence of boilers
in the baseline.

{:refdef: style="text-align: center;"}
![](media\package_5_image11.png)
{:refdef}

{:refdef: style="text-align: center;"}
Figure 7. Applicability for the HP-RTU + ASHP Boiler + DCV + HR +
Economizers package by individual measure
{:refdef}

The package was applicable to 85% of the stock floor area, meaning at
least one measure was applicable. Approximately 15% of the stock was not
applicable to any of the five measures. Figure 8 shows the measure
combinations with the highest applicability by fraction of total floor
area. The most common combination of measures was the HP-RTU retrofit +
DCV + Heat Recovery + Economizers, which was applicable to 31% of the
stock by floor area. There were 15 additional measure combinations
observed in the results that are not shown, but each were applicable to
under 2% of the stock by floor area.

{:refdef: style="text-align: center;"}
![](media\package_5_image12.png)
{:refdef}

{:refdef: style="text-align: center;"}
Figure 8. Top observed measure combinations for the HP-RTU + ASHP
Boiler + DCV + HR + Economizers package
{:refdef}

## 6.2. Stock Energy Impacts

The HP-RTU + ASHP Boiler + DCV + HR + Economizers package demonstrates
19.8% total site energy savings (857 trillion British thermal units
\[TBtu\]) for the U.S. commercial building stock modeled in ComStock
(Figure 9). The savings are a result of electrification of gas-furnace
and boiler systems, which are then combined with efficiency upgrades
like DCV, Heat/Energy Recovery, and Economizers:

-   **86.7%** stock **heating gas** savings (740.8 TBtu)

-   **-84.9%** stock **heating electricity** savings (-148.7 TBtu)

-   **21.8%** stock **cooling electricity** savings (145.5 TBtu)

-   **18.6%** stock **fan electricity** savings (96.5 TBtu).

{:refdef: style="text-align: center;"}
![](media\package_5_image13.jpeg)
{:refdef}

{:refdef: style="text-align: center;"}
Figure 9. Comparison of annual site energy consumption between the
ComStock baseline and the HP-RTU + ASHP Boiler + DCV + HR + Economizers
(Package 5) scenario
{:refdef}

Energy consumption is categorized both by fuel type and end use.

The HP-RTU + ASHP Boiler + DCV + HR + Economizers package is made up of
five different HVAC measures, which results in measure interaction and
compounding energy savings. While it is difficult to extract the savings
attributed to each individual measure from the stock level results, we
have an idea of what impacts each of the five measures should have on
the results. This helps us validate that the savings we see from the
full package are reasonable and as expected.

-   **HP-RTU**: This measure electrifies natural gas heating in RTU
    systems, so we expect large natural gas heating savings (up to 50%)
    and heating electricity penalties. The measure also replaces
    electric resistance RTUs with higher efficiency heat pumps, so in
    those cases we see electric heating savings. These somewhat offset
    the electric heating penalties from buildings that started with
    natural gas heating, so the stock heating electricity penalty is
    expected to be no larger than 5%. We can also expect cooling and fan
    savings around 15%--25% due to replacing the existing cooling system
    with a higher efficiency heat pump.

-   **ASHP-Boiler:** This measure electrifies gas boiler systems, so we
    expect large natural gas heating savings (up to 50%) and heating
    electricity penalties (up to 35%). The buildings this measure
    applies to tend to be larger buildings that make up a small portion
    of the stock by number of buildings but a more substantial portion
    of the stock by energy consumption. This building does not affect
    cooling or fan end uses, but we can expect some increases in pump
    energy due to the installation of the heat pump, although pump
    energy makes up a very small portion of the annual site energy.

-   **DCV:** This measure reduces outdoor air intake during periods of
    reduced occupancy, resulting in heating and cooling savings during
    those times. We can expect up to 10% heating savings and up to 5%
    cooling savings as a result of the implementation of DCV. When
    combined with economizing, we may expect higher cooling savings
    because the technologies will work together to ensure the DCV is not
    reducing outdoor air if it is beneficial for cooling.

-   **Exhaust Air Heat/Energy Recovery:** This measure installs
    heat/energy recovery systems which precondition outdoor ventilation
    air using exhaust air. This measure reduces the loads on heating and
    cooling coils, so we can expect up to 25% heating savings and up to
    10% cooling savings at the stock level. We can also expect an
    increase in energy recovery end use; however, this makes up a very
    small portion of the annual stock site energy.

-   **Economizers:** This measure implements economizing in buildings
    that do not already have it, enabling the spaces to leverage colder
    outdoor air when it is beneficial for cooling. We expect this
    measure to primarily impact cooling end uses with up to 5% savings.
    There could be small heating penalties (\<1%) as a result of this
    measure. Because economizing is already required by energy codes in
    some climates, the expected energy savings for this measure are
    lower than others in the package. However, when combined with the
    other HVAC measures in the package, there could be larger impacts.

When combining all five of these HVAC measures together, we see
impressive stock-level savings of 19.8%. The two heat pump measures
electrify 87% of the natural gas heating end use but add substantial
electric heating loads. This large reduction in natural gas heating is
possible because the HVAC systems that receive either the HP-RTU measure
or ASHP-Boiler measure make up 62% of the ComStock floor area but 91% of
the stock natural gas heating end use. The heat pumps also result in
cooling savings due to the addition of a more efficient cooling system.
When DCV, Heat/Energy Recovery, and Economizers are added after the heat
pump measures, they result in additional cooling and fan savings as well
as a reduced electric heating penalty at the stock level. In addition,
there were changes in the heat recovery and pump end uses as discussed
above, although these make up a small portion of the stock energy.

## 6.3. Stock Greenhouse Gas Emissions Impact

ComStock simulation results show greenhouse gas emissions avoided across
all electricity grid scenarios for all on-site combustion fuel types
(Figure 10). The overall emissions across all fuels saw a decrease of
14%--20% (49--56 million tons of CO<sub>2e</sub>) between the three scenarios.
This package results in 62% (50 million tons of CO<sub>2e</sub>) avoided natural
gas emissions compared to the ComStock baseline. The natural gas results
remain consistent across all three grid scenarios, as these scenarios
exclusively pertain to modifications within the electricity grid,
without affecting natural gas outcomes. Electricity greenhouse gas
emissions avoided from the electricity grid vary depending on the
scenario chosen; some scenarios show increased electricity emissions and
others show reduced electricity emissions. This is because the scenarios
project different levels of renewable energy penetration to the grid.
The LRMER Low RE scenario shows a 3 MMT CO<sub>2e</sub> increase in electricity
emissions, while the LRMER High RE and eGRID scenarios show 1-4 MMT
CO<sub>2e</sub> of avoided greenhouse gas emissions from the electricity grid.

{:refdef: style="text-align: center;"}
![](media\package_5_image14.jpg)
{:refdef}

{:refdef: style="text-align: center;"}
Figure 10. Greenhouse gas emissions comparison of the ComStock baseline
and the HP-RTU + ASHP Boiler + DCV + HR + Economizers (Package 5)
scenario
{:refdef}

Three electricity grid scenarios are presented: Cambium Long-Run
Marginal Emissions Rate (LRMER) High Renewable Energy (RE) Cost 15-Year,
Cambium LRMER Low RE Cost 15-Year, and eGRID. MMT stands for million
metric tons.

## 6.4. Site Energy Savings Distributions

This section discusses site energy consumption for quality
assurance/quality control purposes. Note that site energy savings can be
useful for these purposes, but other factors should be considered when
drawing conclusions, as they do not necessarily translate proportionally
to source energy savings, greenhouse gas emissions avoided, or energy
cost.

Figure 11 shows the percent savings distributions of the baseline
ComStock models versus the HP-RTU + ASHP Boiler + DCV + HR + Economizers
scenario by end use and fuel type for applicable models. In other words,
each data point in the distribution represents the percent energy
savings between a baseline ComStock model and the corresponding upgrade
model with measures applied.

Most of the savings for the "Other Fuel Heating" and "Natural Gas
Heating" categories are at 100% owing to replacing the combustion
fuel-based system in the baseline with an all-electric heat pump system
in the HP-RTU + ASHP Boiler + DCV + HR + Economizers scenario.

Some models unintuitively show "Natural Gas Heating" and "Other Fuel"
heating penalties. Closer investigation shows that these models are
exclusively "PVAV with gas heat with electric reheat," which did not
receive the heat pump upgrades and only received one or more of the DCV,
Heat/Energy Recovery, or Economizer upgrades. For this system type, the
efficiency measures applied must have had a negative effect on heating
loads. However, upon looking at site energy savings for this system type
only, there are still positive site energy savings, meaning cooling
savings have more than offset the heating penalty.

{:refdef: style="text-align: center;"}
![](media\package_5_image15.jpeg)
{:refdef}

{:refdef: style="text-align: center;"}
Figure 11. Percent site energy savings distribution for ComStock models
with the HP-RTU + ASHP Boiler + DCV + HR + Economizers package (Package 5) applied by end use and fuel type
{:refdef}

The data points that appear above some of the distributions indicate
outliers in the distribution, meaning they fall outside 1.5 times the
interquartile range. The value for n indicates the number of ComStock
models that were applicable for energy savings for the fuel type
category.

Pump electricity increased between the baseline and upgrade scenario, as
expected, due to the addition of heat pump boilers to some models. This
measure adds an additional circulation pump to the heat pump loop,
increasing the required pump power. In addition, the ASHP boiler system
operates at a lower supply temperature than the existing gas boiler it
is replacing, which increases the required loop flow rate. Both factors
can increase pumping energy.

Most buildings saw heating, cooling, and fan electricity savings due to
higher efficiency performance of HP-RTUs compared with traditional RTUs,
combined with the additional efficiency measures applied. However, some
models saw heating electricity penalties. If a building began with 100%
natural gas heating and was converted to 100% electric heating, it is
not shown on Figure 11 in the electric heating end use row, as the
electric heating penalty would be infinity. Rather, the buildings
showing an electric heating penalty are ones that started with mostly
natural gas heating but some small portion of electric resistance
heating (such as electric baseboards in a vestibule). When those
buildings were converted to fully electric heating via a heat pump, the
electric heating penalty becomes very large. In most buildings that
began with some electric heating, the addition of the heat pump resulted
in positive energy savings, with a median around 30% savings.

Some models show negative heat recovery savings, noting that the heat
recovery end use is for electricity used to operate enthalpy wheels.
Additionally, the heat recovery end use includes added fan energy needed
to overcome the heat exchanger. The negative energy savings are due to
increased prevalence of heat recovery from the measure package, noting
that this penalty is generally made up for in heating and cooling
savings. However, the heat recovery end use makes up a very small
portion of building stock energy usage (as was seen in Figure 9), so
negative percentage savings in this end use has minimal impact.

Minimal differences are observed for water systems, refrigeration,
interior lighting, and interior equipment, as these systems are not
directly impacted by the upgrade package. However, some buildings show
minor changes due only to subtle differences in ambient air temperature
that affect the operation of these systems. The interior lighting end
use shows a small number of samples with savings/penalties as a result
of applying this measure scenario. This is a known bug in the workflow
as this measure does not impact the lighting end use. However, this bug
affects very few buildings and therefore the impact is minimal.

Figure 12 shows the site energy savings distributions between the
ComStock baseline and the HP-RTU + ASHP Boiler + DCV + HR + Economizers
scenario by fuel type and total site energy. The total site energy
savings distribution shows savings values generally between 15% and 35%
for the 25<sup>th</sup> and 75<sup>th</sup> percentiles, respectively. Combined site
energy savings alone is not a comprehensive assessment of
electrification measures, so other considerations should be made as
well.

{:refdef: style="text-align: center;"}
![](media\package_5_image16.jpeg)
{:refdef}

{:refdef: style="text-align: center;"}
Figure 12. Percent site energy savings distribution for ComStock models
with the applied HP-RTU + ASHP Boiler + DCV + HR + Economizers package
(Package 5) by fuel type
{:refdef}

The data points that appear above some of the distributions indicate
outliers in the distribution, meaning they fall outside 1.5 times the
interquartile range. The value for n indicates the number of ComStock
models that were applicable for energy savings for the fuel type
category.

The site electricity distribution shows some energy penalties. These are
mostly buildings that changed from gas heat to electric heat, so the
penalties are expected, noting that these buildings likely show
reductions in other heating fuel types that were electrified. Some of
this electricity penalty is reduced or mitigated through savings for
cooling, fans, and heat recovery, depending on the building and its
climate zone. Most of the buildings, however, show electricity savings,
as a result of replacing existing systems with high-efficiency heat
pumps combined with the other efficiency measures.

The "Natural Gas" and "Other Fuel" end uses show many models with near
100% savings. These are buildings that are completely electrified from
the HP-RTU or ASHP Boiler measures and where gas is not used for other
end uses. Models with less than 100% gas or other fuel savings generally
have some nonapplicable gas HVAC system type in the baseline, or other
end uses, such as water heating, that are not electrified through the
HP-RTU or ASHP Boiler measures. Some models show negative natural gas
site savings. As discussed earlier, this was found to be buildings that
did not receive either heat pump upgrade, and the additional HVAC
upgrades applied resulted in a heating penalty.

A small portion of buildings show negative site energy savings. Upon
further investigation, these are almost exclusively buildings that did
not receive either one of the heat pump upgrades, and only received one
or more of the DCV, Heat/Energy Recovery, or Economizer upgrades. These
upgrades must have had a negative impact on the site energy for these
buildings, which could be related to climate zone, internal loads, or
other unique aspects of those buildings.

Figure 13 shows the site energy savings distributions between the
ComStock baseline and the HP-RTU + ASHP Boiler + DCV + HR + Economizers
scenario by HVAC system present in the baseline building. While this
package is applicable to 35 different HVAC systems, some systems got a
more comprehensive upgrade than others. Buildings that began with a
rooftop unit or boiler system underwent a full system swap out via the
HP-RTU or ASHP Boiler measure, while other HVAC systems only received
some combination of DCV, HR, and/or Economizers. The HVAC systems that
show the largest site energy savings (median of 20-30% savings) after
the upgrade package was applied are PSZ-AC systems and boiler systems
because they were retrofitted with a heat pump, in addition to other
advanced HVAC controls measures. Most other systems saw site energy
savings in the range of 5-10% for the median building. A few outliers,
primarily in boiler systems, saw negative site energy savings, which is
a result of adding substantial electric heating load to the building.

{:refdef: style="text-align: center;"}
![](media\package_5_image17.jpeg)
{:refdef}

{:refdef: style="text-align: center;"}
Figure 13. Percent site energy savings distribution for ComStock
models with the applied HP-RTU + ASHP Boiler + DCV + HR + Economizers
package (Package 5) by baseline HVAC system**
{:refdef}

The data points that appear above some of the distributions indicate
outliers in the distribution, meaning they fall outside 1.5 times the
interquartile range. The value for n indicates the number of ComStock
models that were applicable for energy savings for the fuel type
category.

## 6.5. Peak Impacts

Figure 14 shows the impact of the HP-RTU + ASHP Boiler + DCV + HR +
Economizers package on seasonal peak timing. The median winter peak is
shifted earlier in the day by 1-2 hours, as morning electric heating now
has a large impact on the peak in the winter. Summer and shoulder peak
distributions moved slightly earlier in the day, but not to the extent
of the winter peak.

{:refdef: style="text-align: center;"}
![](media\package_5_image18.jpeg)
{:refdef}

{:refdef: style="text-align: center;"}
Figure 14. Maximum daily peak timing by season between the baseline and
HP-RTU + ASHP Boiler + DCV + HR + Economizers (Package 5) scenario
{:refdef}

Figure 15 shows the noncoincident peak electricity demand intensity for
the median building between the ComStock baseline and the HP-RTU + ASHP
Boiler + DCV + HR + Economizers scenario. Results are presented by
Building America climate zone. Large peak reductions occur during the
summer, with all climate zones seeing over a 17% reduction in peak
electricity demand intensity. This is due to the cooling load reductions
as a result of the upgrade package. Note that the Subarctic climate zone
does not have any days that are considered Cooling Degree Days and
therefore does not display a summer peak.

The median winter peak increased in all climate zones except for
Hot-Humid, Hot-Dry, and Marine, which generally have low heating
requirements. The electrification of heating caused the median winter
peak intensity to increase by up to 50% in some climates, with Cold,
Very Cold, and Subarctic climates showing the largest change. Note that
by electrifying the heating end use, the winter peak timing can shift to
a different part of the day (or different day of the year) where heating
is more prevalent, so the baseline and upgrade peak intensities shown
may not necessarily represent the same timestep.

The shoulder peak intensity shows reductions of 13%--19% across most
climate zones, with the exception of Subarctic, which shows no change in
shoulder peak intensity. This is because shoulder peaks in most climates
are driven by cooling loads (which are reduced through this upgrade
package), whereas shoulder peaks in the Subarctic climate are driven by
heating or other miscellaneous loads.

{:refdef: style="text-align: center;"}
![](media\package_5_image19.png)
{:refdef}

{:refdef: style="text-align: center;"}
Figure 15. Maximum daily peak intensity by season and climate zone
between the baseline and HP-RTU + ASHP Boiler + DCV + HR + Economizers
(Package 5) scenario
{:refdef}

## 6.6. Building Type Impacts

Figure 16 and Figure 17 show the impacts of the HP-RTU + ASHP Boiler +
DCV + HR + Economizers upgrade package on natural gas and electricity
consumption across the building types in the stock. Offices, schools,
retail standalone, hospitals, and warehouses we affected most by the
electrification of heating, as shown by their drastic reduction in
natural gas energy. This is a result of the breakdown of existing HVAC
systems in these building types. The majority have PSZ-AC systems or
boilers, which were replaced by heat pumps. The building types that
still show substantial gas usage generally use gas for other end uses
not impacted by this measure like water heating (food service, hotels),
cooking (food service, strip malls with food service) and other gas
process loads, or have a high prevalence of HVAC system types not
applicable to this package (e.g., PTACs in hotels).

Some building types, such as large offices, schools, hospitals,
warehouses, and large hotels showed a slight increase in electricity.
These typically larger building types are more likely to have received
the ASHP-Boiler upgrade due to the prevalence of boiler-based HVAC
systems. Because the ASHP-Boiler measure does not touch the building's
cooling system, these buildings do not benefit from the additional
cooling savings from a heat pump to offset the increase electric heating
load.

The remaining building types all showed a reduction in total
electricity, which is a result of the HP-RTU measure improving cooling
efficiency and/or the addition of DCV, Heat/Energy Recovery, and
Economizers. Overall, the electricity impacts across all building types
were minimal, which is a result of adding a lot of electric heating load
while simultaneously improving efficiency of cooling and fan end uses.

{:refdef: style="text-align: center;"}
![](media\package_5_image20.jpeg)
{:refdef}

{:refdef: style="text-align: center;"}
Figure 16. Annual stock natural gas energy consumption by building type
before and after the HP-RTU + ASHP Boiler + DCV + HR + Economizers
package (Package 5) was applied
{:refdef}

{:refdef: style="text-align: center;"}
![](media\package_5_image21.jpeg)
{:refdef}

{:refdef: style="text-align: center;"}
Figure 17. Annual stock electricity consumption by building type before
and after the HP-RTU + ASHP Boiler + DCV + HR + Economizers package
(Package 5) was applied
{:refdef}

# References

\[1\] \"2018 COMMERICAL BUILDINGS ENERGY CONSUMPTION SURVEY (CBECS),\" \[Online\]. Available: <https://www.eia.gov/consumption/commercial>. \[Accessed 14 November 2022\].

\[2\] A. Parker, H. Horsey, M. Dahlhausen, M. Praprost, C. CaraDonna, A. LeBar and L. Klun, \"ComStock Reference Documentation: Version 1,\" National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, CO, 2022.

\[3\] \"EnergyPlus Version 22.1.0 Documentation Input Output Reference,\" 2022. \[Online\]. Available: <https://energyplus.net/documentation>.

\[4\] ASHRAE, 2015 ASHRAE Handbook HVAC Applications, 2015.

\[5\] Natural Resources Canada, \"AIR-SOURCE HEAT PUMP SIZING AND SELECTION GUIDE,\" 2020. \[Online\]. Available: <https://natural-resources.canada.ca/sites/nrcan/files/canmetenergy/pdf/ASHP%20Sizing%20and%20Selection%20Guide%20(EN).pdf>.

\[6\] \"Cambium \| Energy Analysis \| NREL,\" \[Online\]. Available: <https://www.nrel.gov/analysis/cambium.html>. \[Accessed 02 September 2022\].

\[7\] \"Emissions & Generation Resource Integrated Database (eGRID) \| US EPA,\" \[Online\]. Available: <https://www.epa.gov/egrid>. \[Accessed 02 September 2022\].

\[8\] E. Present, P. Gagnon, E. J. H. Wilson, N. Merket, P. R. White and S. Horowitz, \"Choosing the Best Carbon Factor for the Job: Exploring Available Carbon Emissions Factors
and the Impact of Factor Selection,\" in *2022 ACEEE Summer Study on Energy Efficiency in Buildings*, Pacific Grove, CA, 2022.

\[9\] G. Vijayakumar, *ANSI/RESNET/ICC 301-2022 - Standard for the Calculation and Labeling of the Energy Performance of Dwelling and Sleeping Units using an Energy Rating Index,* Oceanside, CA, 2022.

\[10\] \"Commerical Buildings Energy Consumption Survey (CBECS),\" 2012. \[Online\]. Available: <https://www.eia.gov/consumption/commercial/data/2012>. \[Accessed 15 November 2022\].

\[11\] B. Thornton, M. Rosenberg, E. Richman, W. Wang, Y. Xie, J. Zhang, H. Cho, V. Mendon, R. Athalye and B. Liu, \"Achieving the 30% Goal: Energy and Cost Savings Analysis of ASHRAE Standard 90.1-2010,\" Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, 2011.
